feat: more updates (#5)
samuel-hawker/proposals: 052-record-reconciled-versions.md

# Record Reconciled Version in Kafka Custom Resource status

For the `Kafka` Custom Resource it is often unclear when an upgrade has truly finished, whether all the brokers have rolled and to which version of the operator a cluster has been reconciled with and which version of Kafka.
The following proposal puts forward a mechanism to make it clear in the `Kafka` custom resources status whether an upgrade is complete, making it easy to programmatically check for upgrade completion. This could potentially be used/adopted in the upgrade system tests or upgrade verification steps for a user, simplifying the code and making for a better upgrade UX story.

## Current situation

Currently the only way to know if an upgrade has finished to completion is to check is all the zookeeper and kafka brokers have rolled.
https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/2a1fdf9d8695bb22a2bf977b0ba5414291530207/systemtest/src/test/java/io/strimzi/systemtest/upgrade/KafkaUpgradeDowngradeST.java#L292

> Additionally, if a user updates the Kafka version, a user needs to check if their Kafka version has been updated by inspecting the Kafka protocol version that the Brokers are running with, and this could require two rolls of the brokers, not just a single roll.

Reviewer: If a user has the `inter.broker.protocol.version` config setting set to the old value, would they still be able to see the new Kafka version?

The following is the proposed new fields:

> ### status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy
```

> The `status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy` field is patched at the end of a **successful** reconcile, and signals to a user that the operator at version `X` was able to reconcile to successful completion, meaning it reached the end of a reconcile without error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy` field is patched at the end of a **successful** reconcile, and signals to a user that the operator at version `X` was able to reconcile to successful completion, meaning it reached the end of a reconcile without error.
```

This would be the field a user would query against to check whether an upgrade was complete - or atleast a complete roll of the Kafka brokers on the latest operator version. Details on how to verify that an upgrade has completed when the `Kafka.spec.kafka.version` is updated is covered in the next section.

Example field in status:
```
status:
  versions:

>     lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy: '0.37.0'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy: '0.37.0'
```

```
If a reconcile does not reach completion, this field is not added or updated, however in the case where it already exists it is left at the previous value.
i.e.

> `status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy=0.35.0` would remain if a post-operator-upgrade reconcilliation on `0.36.0` failed, as the information that a prior reconcilliation passed would be useful to an end user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy=0.35.0` would remain if a post-operator-upgrade reconciliation on `0.36.0` failed, as the information that a prior reconciliation passed would be useful to an end user.
```

### status.versions.kafka

The `status.versions.kafka` field is updated in the CR at the end of the KafkaReconciler in the `podsReady` method and signals to a user that the KafkaReconciler has finished reconciling the Kafka brokers to Kafka version `Y`, regardless of success or failure later in the reconcile.
```
status:
  versions:
    kafka: '3.5.1'
```

This field is required as it signals that a reconcile to Kafka version `Y` has finished, and this extra information is important and needs to be available, as a user just checking `status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy` is not sufficient for upgrades where multiple rolls of the brokers are required, such as a Kafka version update alongside an upgrade.

> If the operator errors during the Kafka reconciliation this field will not be updated, if however Kafka was successfully updated it will be, meaning errors later in the reconcile, such as failing to deploy the `entity-operator` or `kafka-exporter` will still show `status.versions.kafka` correctly up to date, but `lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy` will not be updated, as well as the CR will no longer be in a `Ready` state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the operator errors during the Kafka reconciliation this field will not be updated. 
If Kafka was successfully updated, the field will also be updated, meaning errors later in the reconcile, such as failing to deploy the `entity-operator` or `kafka-exporter` will still show `status.versions.kafka` correctly up to date, but `lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy` will not be updated, and the CR will no longer be in a `Ready` state.
```

Note: It may be useful to also include versions for the `inter-broker-protocol-version` and `log-message-format-version` in the status, such as `status.versions.kafkaInterBrokerProtocol` and `status.versions.kafkaLogMessageFormat` as these too could cause multiple reconciles and a user might want to verify that these have been picked up by the brokers, but this is less important than the main two fields proposed above.

## `Kafka` Custom Resource & Reconciler changes

- Update `KafkaStatus` with new `versions` field and sub fields as agreed on this proposal.

> - Update `initialStatus` [method](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/0c4e96de69e20cb80e86fd8ccb3ab8baca431822/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/assembly/KafkaAssemblyOperator.java#L292) to seed new status with the `status.versions` field if it is already set on the CR. This is so that any status update leaves these fields unchanges, unless they are explicitly modified as part of reconcile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update `initialStatus` [method](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/0c4e96de69e20cb80e86fd8ccb3ab8baca431822/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/assembly/KafkaAssemblyOperator.java#L292) to seed new status with the `status.versions` field if it is already set on the CR. This is so that any status update leaves these fields unchanged, unless they are explicitly modified as part of reconcile.
```

> - The update to `status.versions.kafka` would happen after the `podsReady` [method](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/0c4e96de69e20cb80e86fd8ccb3ab8baca431822/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/assembly/KafkaReconciler.java#L817) updating the Kafka version once all pods are ready. The Kafka version can be determined from the `StrimziPodSet` which have the information available in the `strimzi.io/kafka-version` annotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The update to `status.versions.kafka` would happen after the `podsReady` [method](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/0c4e96de69e20cb80e86fd8ccb3ab8baca431822/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/assembly/KafkaReconciler.java#L817) updating the Kafka version once all pods are ready. The Kafka version can be determined from the `StrimziPodSet` which has the information available in the `strimzi.io/kafka-version` annotation.
```

- The update to `status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy` would happen in the `createOrUpdate` [method](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/blob/2a1fdf9d8695bb22a2bf977b0ba5414291530207/cluster-operator/src/main/java/io/strimzi/operator/cluster/operator/assembly/KafkaAssemblyOperator.java#L137) alongside the `Ready` update where the operator version would be updated into the field.

## Examples

### Fresh Install

- On a fresh install, a user creates a Kafka CR:
  ```
  # the status is not actually set, but treat it as empty here
  status: {}
  ```
- The KafkaReconciler reconciles the CR and creates `StrimziPodSet` CRs
- StrimziPodSet reconciler reconciles the `SPS`s creating the Kafka Brokers
- Kafka Reconciler picks up that the Kafka Brokers managed by the SPS are now Ready and finished installing.
  Updating the status with the reconciled kafka versions:
  ```
  status:
    versions:
      kafka: 3.5.0
  ```
- Kafka Reconciler continues to install other components such as entity operator.
  Once all components are deployed and updated, update `Kafka` CR with
  ```
  status:
    versions:

>       lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy: 0.37.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy: 0.37.0
```

      kafka: 3.5.0
  ```

> - User can now verify `Kafka.status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy` and `Kafka.status.versions.kafka` to check if it has reconciled to correct/expected levels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User can now verify `Kafka.status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy` and `Kafka.status.versions.kafka` to check if it has reconciled to correct/expected levels.
```

- if there is an error at any point prior to the Kafka Broker rollout `Kafka.status.versions.kafka` will not be updated.

> - if there is an error at any point during reconcile `Kafka.status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy` will not be updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if there is an error at any point during reconcile `Kafka.status.versions.lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy` will not be updated.
```

### Upgrade (from no mechansim)

Same as fresh install, upgrade from 0.37.0 to 0.38.0 with Kafka cersion 3.5.1
- On an upgrade, a user has a Kafka CR:
  ```
  # the status.versions is not set, but treat it as empty here
  status:
    versions: {}
  ```
- The KafkaReconciler reconciles the CR and creates `StrimziPodSet` CRs
- StrimziPodSet reconciler reconciles the `SPS`s creating the Kafka Brokers
- Kafka Reconciler picks up that the Kafka Brokers managed by the SPS are now Ready and finished installing.
  Updating the status with the reconciled kafka versions:
  ```
  status:
    versions:
      kafka: 3.5.1
  ```
- Kafka Reconciler continues to install other components such as entity operator.
  Once all components are deployed and updated, update `Kafka` CR with
  ```
  status:
    versions:

>       lastSuccessfulReconcilitationBy: 0.38.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      lastSuccessfulReconciliationBy: 0.38.0
```
